# Political-Behavior-exam-fall-2020

The final assignment for the course 'Political Behavior' at the University of Copenhagen in the fall 2020 was a free assignment.

My group and I wrote about the 2020 municipal election in France. In the spring of 2020, France held municipal elections in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic. French municipal elections are held in two rounds. Despite rising infection rates, the first round was held on March 15. Two days later, the French government enforced a national lockdown and moved the date of the second round from March 22 to June 28. On May 11, the government eased lockdown restrictions for the south-western parts of France while maintaining restrictions for the rest of the country. This created a geographical divide in France which made then Prime Minister Édouard Phillippe state that France was a country "cut in two". On June 2, lockdown restrictions were eased for most of France.

The lockdown of France was an unprecedented political intervention with enormous implications for the economy and citizens’ personal freedom. In this paper, we exploit the division of France in the middle of the two municipal election rounds to set up a natural experiment where residents were exposed to either a soft or a hard lockdown based on their area of residence. We will use the term ‘hard’ lockdown to denote the geographical area where the lockdown continued until June 2 and ‘soft' lockdown to denote the area that experienced a reopening on May 11. We restrict our analysis by only including municipalities that border the lockdown division to increase comparability between the units. We use this natural experiment to estimate the effect of a hard lockdown on voting behavior in the second round of the election. Based on this, we put forth the following research question:

Does a hard lockdown affect voting behavior?

By using official election data on both election rounds, we set up a difference-in-differences (hereafter denoted as DiD) design to study four hypotheses rooted in recent empirical findings and theoretical expectations to answer the research question. We investigate if being treated with a hard lockdown increased turnout (Hypothesis 1), increased vote share for the incumbent mayor (Hypothesis 2), increased vote share for conservative parties (Hypothesis 3a) or green parties (Hypothesis 3b). We find a significant relationship between a hard lockdown and an increased vote share for the incumbent mayor (Hypothesis 2) which we argue is an indication of a local rally-‘round-the-flag effect. We do not find support for any other hypotheses.

Several papers based on different countries have already looked at COVID-19’s effect on voting behavior. We argue that our case is particularly strong because it can be perceived as a least-likely case study (Flyvbjerg, 2006: 231). One reason for this is that the French municipal elections have traditionally been perceived as protest elections, meaning that the presidential party is often punished and opposition parties often rewarded. Another reason is that, because the lockdown restrictions were enforced on a national level, voters should be less likely to base their vote on interventions that local governments were unable to control. If we can verify our hypotheses under least-likely circumstances, we can argue for an increase in the findings' external validity and its general robustness (Flyvbjerg, 2006: 230).

We depart from similar papers in several ways. One is that the natural experiment and our design allow us to use actual election data instead of self-reported survey data, thus escaping the problem of bias from over-reporting and self-reporting. Another is that the close temporal distance between the two elections make for an ideal comparison; other studies have relied on past elections dating several years back, but we are able to compare two election rounds only three months apart. With these departures in mind, we hope that this paper may add new theoretical insights. In particular, we hope to increase the understanding of which effects a unique policy intervention as a lockdown on society has for voting behavior.
